Early Blight (Alternaria solani)

Symptom
The fruit become infected-through the calyx or stem attachment, either in the green or ripe stage. Concentric ring present on the fruit surface.
Appear leathery and may be covered by a velvety mass of black spores.
Infected fruit frequently drop, and losses of 50% of the immature fruit may occur.

Identification of pathogen
Fungus
Mycelium- septate, branched, light brown, become darker with age
Conidiophores- 50 to 90μm in length and dark coloured
Conidia-beaked, muriform, dark coloured and borne singly

Favourable condition
Maximum dispersal of conidia- 9am and 12 noon
plants suffering from water stress- susceptible

Spread and survival
Spread by wind and rain splashes
Under dry conditions- survives in infected plant debris in the soil for 3 yrs
Seed borne

Management
Use disease free seeds for sowing
Field sanitation
Crop rotation with non solanaceous crop
Optimum irrigation- to avoid stress condition
Seed treatment- thiram 2g/kg
3 sprays with difolatan 0.2 % at fortnightly interval

---

Late blight  Phytophthora infestans 

Symptoms
Water-soaked black lesions on leaves and stems
Lesions expand rapidly and the entire leaf becomes necrotic.
White sporulation (sporangia and sporangiophores) on leaves.
Dark brown lesions on fruit
Soft rot and disintegration of fruits.

Causal organism
Phytophthora infestans (Mont.) de Bary
Asexual spores 
Indeterminate sporangiophores, Zoospores Biflagellate with one tinsel flagellum directed anteriorly and one whiplash flagellum directed posteriorly
Pathogen
Hyaline and coenocytic
Sexual spores 
Thick-walled oospore
Survival and Mode of Spread

Survival
Infected Debris
Primary spread
Infected debris
Secondary spread
Wind

Favourable conditions
Cool nights, warm days and extended wet conditions from rain and fog
Sporangia formed when RH is < 90%
Optimum temp for sporulation is 18 - 22oC

Integrated Disease Management
Proper drainage
Crop rotation
Soil application of Trichoderma asperellum (viride) @ 1.0 kg/ac
Spray Cyazofamid 34.5% SC @ 80 ml/ac or Azoxystrobin 23% SC @ 200 ml/ac or Mancozeb 35% SC @ 1000 g/ac or Zineb 75% WP @ 800 g/ac or Azoxystrobin 18.2%+ Difenoconazole 11.4% SC @ 200 ml/ac

---

Bacterial leaf spot  (Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. vesicatoria)

Field Diagnostic Symptoms
Small, brown, water soaked, circular spots with yellow halo on leaves.
Defoliation of older leaves.
Small, water-soaked spots on green fruit .
Centre of spots become irregular, light brown with sunken and scabby surface.

Causal organism
Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. vesicatoria (ex Doidge) Vauterin
Survival and Mode of Spread

Survival 
Infected debris
Primary spread
Infected plant debris and seed
Secondary spread
Rain splash

Favourable conditions
Moist weather and splattering rains
High humidity or persistent dew.

Integrated Disease Management
Use of disease free seed
Spray Streptocycline 40-100 ppm (20 g/ac)

---

Septoria Leaf Spot (Septoria lycopersici)

Symptoms:
Small, round to irregular spots with grey centre and dark margin on leaves.
Spots coalesce and leaves are blighted.
Complete defoliation.
Stems and flowers are affected.

Causal Organism – Septoria lycopersici Speg.

Mycelium : Hyaline and septate

Fruiting body : Pycnidium: globose, without distinct ostiole

Pathogen: Pycnidiospore : filiform, septate, hyaline

Survival and Mode of Spread

Survival: Infected plant debris

Primary spread: Mycelium or conidia

Secondary spread: Conidia through rain splash or wind

Favourable conditions
High humidity

Integrated Disease Management
Cultural:
Removal and destruction of affected plant parts

Biological :
Seed treatment :Trichoderma asperellum @ 4g/kg seeds

Chemical:
Fluxapyroxad 250 g/l + Pyraclostrobin 250 g/l SC - 200-250 ml/ha.

---

Leaf curl (Tomato leaf curl virus)

Field Diagnostic Symptoms
Severe stunting of plants
Downward rolling and crinkling of the leaves
Older leaves become leathery and brittle
Shortening of internodes
Appearence of more lateral branches - bushy appearance

Causal organism -
Tomato leaf curl virus (TLCV)
Vector :
Whiteflies –Bemisia tabaci

Survival and Mode of Spread
Primary spread:
Whiteflies.
Secondary spread:
Movement of infected plants

Integrated Disease Management
Raising nursery in protected condition
Growing Sorghum, Maize or Bajra as barrier crop
Use of disease free seeds
Yellow sticky traps @ 5nos./ac
Remove alternate weed host - Abutilon indicum
Spraying Dimethoate 30 EC @ 200 ml/ac or Methyl demeton 25 EC @ 200 ml/ac or Thiamethoxam 25 WG @ 200 g/ac or Imidacloprid 17.8 SL @ 200 ml/ac

---