Mosaic Virus

There are many viruses that can infect tomatoes. They are often capable of infecting many other species of plants as well. For example, tomato mosaic virus most often infects tomatoes, but can also infect pepper, potato, apple, pear, cherry and numerous weeds, including pigweed and lamb's quarters.

Symptoms
Many viruses produce similar symptoms.
If plants are infected early, they may appear yellow and stunted overall.
Mottled light and dark green on leaves.
Leaves may be curled, malformed, or reduced in size.
Spots of dead leaf tissue may become apparent with certain varieties at warm temperatures.
Fruits may ripen unevenly.
Reduced fruit number and size.
Fruit with raised or depressed off-color circles on fruit.
Fruits may show internal browning just under the skin (brownwall).

Managing
Many viruses cause similar symptoms, but it is impossible to confirm without a diagnosis from a plant pathology lab.
Herbicide damage from products used on lawns can often be mistaken for viruses in home gardens.
There are resistant varieties available for some tomato viruses.
Look for abbreviations like ToMV and TMV in your seed catalog, as well as specific catalog codes for disease resistance.
No variety can completely protect plants from all tomato viruses.
Remove plants that you suspect may be infected with a virus so they do not spread the virus in the garden. Do not compost them.

Cultural practices
Start the season with un-infected transplants
Use certified disease-free seed or treat your own seed.
Soak seeds in a 10% solution of trisodium phosphate (Na3PO4) for at least 15 minutes.
Heat dry seeds to 158 °F and hold them at that temperature for two to four days.
Hot water treatment is not adequate for some tomato viruses. 
Purchase transplants only from reputable sources. Ask about the sanitation procedures they use to prevent disease.
Inspect transplants prior to purchase. Choose only transplants showing no clear symptoms.
Avoid producing transplants in greenhouses that also contain perennial ornamentals, as they can be a reservoir of viruses.
Rotation
Avoid planting in fields where tomato root debris is present, as the virus can survive long-term in roots.
Prevent and slow the spread of viruses
Wash hands with soap and water before and during the handling of plants to reduce potential spread between plants.
Good sanitation
Disinfect tools regularly — ideally between working on each plant, as plants can be infected before showing obvious symptoms.
Soaking tools for 1 minute in a 1:9 dilution of germicidal bleach is highly effective.
A 1-minute soak in a 20% weight/volume solution of nonfat dry milk and water is effective for some viruses.
When pruning plants, have two pruners and alternate between them to allow proper soaking time between plants.
Avoid using tobacco products around tomato plants, and wash hands after using tobacco products and before working with the plants. Tobacco in cigarettes and other tobacco products may be infected with either ToMV or TMV, both of which could spread to the tomato plants.
If a virus is confirmed, employ stringent sanitation procedures to reduce spread to other plants, fields, tunnels and greenhouses.
Completely pull up and burn infected plants. Do not compost infected plant material.
After working with diseased plants, thoroughly disinfect all tools and hands as outlined above.
For added security against spread, keep separate tools for working in the diseased area and avoid working with healthy plants after working in an area with diseased plants.
At the end of the season, burn all plants from diseased areas, even healthy-appearing ones, or bury them away from vegetable production areas.
Disinfect stakes, ties, wires or any other equipment between growing seasons using the methods noted above.

---