Cucurbit Powdery Mildew

Impact and causal fungi
Powdery mildew is a common disease of cucurbits under field and greenhouse conditions in most areas of the world. Although all cucurbits are susceptible, symptoms are less common on cucumber and melon because many commercial cultivars have resistance. This disease can be a major production problem. Quantity of yield is reduced due to a decrease in the size or number of fruit or a decrease in the length of the harvest period. Premature senescence of infected leaves can result in reduced market quality because fruit become sunburnt or ripen prematurely or incompletely.  Such fruit have poor storability (winter squash), low soluble solids with consequent poor flavor (melon), poor rind color (pumpkin), and shriveled, discolored handles (pumpkin). Stress from disease can lead to imperfections on fruit rind such as speckling, raised indentations, and oedema.  In addition, powdery mildew infection predisposes plants to other diseases, in particular, gummy stem blight.
Podosphaera xanthii (previously known as Sphaerotheca fuliginea and S. fusca) and Erysiphe cichoracearum are the two most commonly recorded fungi causing cucurbit powdery mildew. E. cichoracearum was considered to be the primary causal organism throughout most of the world before 1958. Today, P. xanthii is found more commonly worldwide. A shift in the predominance of these two fungi may have occurred or the causal organism may have been misidentified. P. xanthii is a more aggressive pathogen than E. cichoracearum. E. cichoracearum may have a lower temperature optimum since this species is found mainly during cooler spring and early summer periods and P. xanthii appears to progress most rapidly during the warmer months.

Symptoms and signs
White, powdery fungal growth develops on both leaf surfaces, petioles, and stems. This growth is primarily asexual spores called conidia. It usually develops first on crown leaves, on shaded lower leaves and on leaf undersurfaces. Yellow spots may form on upper leaf surfaces opposite powdery mildew colonies. Older plants are affected first. Infected leaves usually wither and die. Plants may senesce prematurely. Fruit infection occurs rarely on watermelon and cucumber. Chasmothecia are dark brown, small (diameter of about 0.003 inches) structures that are barely discernable without a hand lens. They develop late in the growing season. The sexual spores within these structures are protected from adverse conditions.

Disease cycle
Source(s) of initial inoculum for powdery mildew have not been definitively determined. The primary initial inoculum is believed to be airborne conidia dispersed potentially long distances from other affected crops, starting in southern states where cucurbit crops are grown earlier in the year. Conidia remain viable for 7-8 days based on results from laboratory studies. The causal fungi are obligate parasites and therefore cannot survive in the absence of living host plants, except as chasmothecia. Possible local sources of initial inoculum include conidia from greenhouse-grown cucurbits, chasmothecia, and alternate hosts. Chasmothecia have been reported rarely in the United States; however, even when present they can be overlooked. They have been found every year in New York that they were looked for since 1989. Both mating types required for sexual reproduction have been found throughout the United States. Although P. xanthii and E. cichoracearum are described as having broad host ranges, strains of these fungi have been shown to be host-specific. The role of non-cucurbit hosts as sources of inoculum has not been investigated. Verbena, a common ornamental plant, could be an important source of inoculum, especially for cucurbits grown as a crop or transplants in the same greenhouse as verbena.

Powdery mildew develops quickly under favorable conditions because the length of time between infection and symptom appearance is usually only 3 to 7 days and a large number of conidia can be produced in a short time. Favorable conditions include dense plant growth and low light intensity.  High relative humidity is favorable for infection and conidial survival; however, infection can take place as low as 50% RH. Dryness is favorable for colonization, sporulation, and dispersal. Rain and free moisture on the plant surface are unfavorable. However, disease development occurs in the presence or absence of dew. Mean temperature of 68-80°F is favorable; infection can occur at 50-90°F. Powdery mildew development is arrested when daytime temperatures are at least 100°F. Plants in the field often do not become affected until after fruit initiation. Susceptibility of leaves is greatest 16 to 23 days after unfolding.

Managing cucurbit powdery mildew
Effectively managing powdery mildew is essential for producing a high-quality cucurbit crop. This foliar, fungal disease is common wherever cucurbits are grown, including in the northeastern U.S. This is because the pathogen produces an abundance of asexual spores (the powdery growth) easily dispersed by wind, thus it can spread widely, and the pathogen can produce a sexual spore in fall that enables it to survive over winter. Leaves affected by powdery mildew die prematurely which results in fewer fruit and/or fruit of low quality (poor flavor, sunscald, poor storability).
Powdery mildew is managed with resistant varieties and fungicides. An integrated program with both management tools is the best approach for achieving effective control because the pathogen is adept at evolving new strains resistant to individual tools such as resistant varieties or a specific fungicide. It is more difficult for new pathogen strains to develop when an integrated program is used, and effective control is more likely. Powdery mildew management program often needs adjustments as the pathogen and management tools change.

Cultural and biological controls including resistant varieties
Genetic resistance is used extensively in cucumber and melon, and has been incorporated into most other cucurbit crops. Most resistant squash and pumpkin varieties in the United States contain one or two copies of the same major resistance gene from a wild cucurbit. Genetic of resistance is different in cucumber and melon. Recently a decline in the degree of suppression achievable with resistant varieties has been detected indicating adaptation in Podosphaera xanthii. Successive cucurbit plantings should be physically separated or at least planted up-wind of older plantings because older plants can serve as a source of conidia. Fungicides containing antagonistic fungi for biological control have been developed.
Resistant varieties are now available in most crop groups with new varieties released most years. Resistance in cucumber is standard in modern varieties and is so strong it is easy to forget this cucurbit type is susceptible until an Heirloom type is grown. Resistance in other cucurbit crop types is not adequate used alone (without fungicide applications) to prevent impact of powdery mildew on yield. Melon varieties with resistance to pathogen races 1 and 2 have exhibited very good suppression in experiments conducted at LIHREC until recently. Squash and pumpkin exhibit a moderate degree of resistance. Select varieties with resistance from both parents (homozygous resistance) when possible. This term is used in a few catalogues (for example Outstanding Seeds) whereas others use terms like ‘high resistance’ and ‘intermediate resistance’ or ‘tolerance’ to generally refer to homozygous and heterozygous resistance, respectively. Degree of disease suppression obtained with a variety also depends on modifying genes present. Plant breeders are actively searching for new sources of resistance to powdery mildew.

Chemical control – General information
Fungicides should be applied every 7-10 days beginning very early in disease development following detection through an IPM scouting program. Inspect plants weekly beginning at the start of fruit formation (when plants become susceptible). Examine upper and lower (under) surfaces of five older leaves at each of 10 sites or until symptoms are found. When there are multiple varieties in a planting, focus on those that lack resistance to powdery mildew and/or those that start to produce fruit early. Initiate a weekly spray program when symptoms are found. A spring planting of summer squash will become infected before main season crops; therefore, when available, it can be used as an indicator of when the pathogen is developing in the area. For a preventive schedule, applications should begin when first female flowers have opened. To obtain adequate control, fungicide is needed on the undersurface of leaves and on leaves low in the plant canopy because the fungus develops best on these surfaces. This can be best accomplished by using mobile fungicides. Another approach is to improve efficacy of contact materials (i.e. chlorothalonil, sulfur, oil) by maximizing spray coverage on undersurfaces of leaves. This is challenging with cucurbit crops due to leaf size and density. Air-assist sprayers are generally considered one of the most effective means to increase spray deposition on all leaf surfaces, but cucurbit crops are a difficult target for sprayers. Coverage produced by traditional hydraulic boom sprayers can be improved by using narrow nozzle spacing (10 inches is better than 20 inches) and examining output to ensure appropriate overlap for nozzle type used, using adequate volume (around 75 gpa), good pressure (80-120 psi), and changing to nozzle tips that direct the spray at an angle to the canopy (e.g. TwinJet). It is valuable to use water sensitive paper to check spray coverage. Likely it will show improved coverage, but not enough to achieve effective control without using mobile fungicides.
Development of fungicide resistance and consequent control failure is always a concern with mobile fungicides due to their single site mode of action. Strains of the powdery mildew fungus resistant (insensitive) to such fungicides have been found throughout the United States, including New York where research on resistance started in 1990. Reduced sensitivity to fungicides from several chemical groups have been detected in other areas of the world as well. Therefore, tactics should always be used to minimize the potential of resistant pathogen strains being selected, starting when a new product is first available: apply mobile fungicides together with a contact fungicide (tank mix), apply them only when needed most to protect yield (which begins at the start of disease development; contact fungicides alone can suffice late in the season), use highest labeled rates, and alternate among as many different mobile fungicides as possible selecting based on resistance occurrence and on modes of action as indicated by their FRAC code (see link to current fungicide information at top of page). In addition, maximize spray coverage and also use nonchemical (cultural) control practices. Frequency of resistant strains can increase rapidly with use during a growing season, especially when products are used exclusively rather than in a resistance management program.
Several biopesticides approved for organic production are registered for this disease in the United States. These products contain natural ingredients such as botanical oils, bicarbonates, hydrogen dioxide, and microbes that function as biocontrol agents and/or induce resistance in plants. Most are contact materials, thus good coverage is critical for effective control. Products evaluated in university trials have exhibited a range in efficacy with some being as effective as conventional contact fungicides.

When to apply fungicides
The action threshold for starting applications is one leaf with symptoms out of 50 older leaves examined. Examine both surfaces of leaves. Starting treatment after this point will compromise control and promotes resistance development. Powdery mildew usually begins to develop around the start of fruit production. Protectant fungicides applied before detection may slow initial development. After detection, continue applying fungicides weekly.  Conditions are favorable for powdery mildew throughout the growing season.

Recommended targeted fungicides
Vivando (FRAC Code 50, formerly U8) has exhibited excellent control in fungicide evaluations. Activity is limited to powdery mildew. It is recommended used with a silicon adjuvant. Do not mix with horticultural oils. It can be applied three times per year with no more than two consecutive applications. REI is 12 hr. PHI is 0 days. Prolivo is a new fungicide with a new active ingredient in this FRAC group registered in NY April 2018.  It was not as effective as Quintec for managing powdery mildew on lower leaf surfaces in a fungicide evaluation conducted at LIHREC in 2016 in which Vivando was not included.
DMI fungicides (FRAC Code 3) include Proline*, Procure, Luna Experience*†, and Rhyme*† (these considered most effective) plus Aprovia Top*, Inspire Super*, Mettle, and Rally.  †not labeled for use on Long Island.  *Fungicides labeled for additional cucurbit diseases; see table of Fungicides for Cucurbit Crops and section below on other diseases. Resistance is quantitative.  While these fungicides have good efficacy, highest label rate is recommended because the pathogen has become less sensitive to this chemistry. Efficacy has varied among products in fungicide evaluations. Proline is thought to have the greatest inherent activity; it was the most effective fungicide evaluated in 2020 on Long Island. Procure applied at its highest label rate provides a higher dose of active ingredient than the other FRAC 3 fungicides. Five applications can be made at this rate.  REI is 12 hr for DMI fungicides. PHI is 0 days for some including Procure; 7 days for others including Proline.   Inspire Super (FRAC 3 and 9) is recommended for other labeled diseases. It is expected to provide some control of powdery mildew. but there are other FRAC 3 fungicides with greater intrinsic activity for powdery mildew that are better choices when this is the only disease developing.  Cevya (FRAC 3), which was registered in NY in 2021, is not recommended because it was not as effective as other DMI fungicides when tested in 2020 and 2021 (see paragraph below on fungicide evaluations at LIHREC). TopGuard is labeled but not recommended because it has Code 11 ingredient plus same DMI ingredient in Rhyme.  Additional products are registered for use outside NY.
Gatten (Code U13) is the newest fungicide; it was introduced in 2018 and registered in NY in 2020.  REI is 12 hr.  PHI is 0 days.  Activity is limited to powdery mildew.  In NY, Gatten can only be applied twice (five times elsewhere) and it is not allowed used on Long Island.  It was as effective as Vivando for managing powdery mildew on lower leaf surfaces in a fungicide evaluation conducted at LIHREC in 2019 but not in 2018.