1.Angular leaf spot

Symptoms
Angular leaf spot (Pseudomonas syringae pv.
lachrymans) will show up on cucurbit plants as
small, water-soaked lesions on the leaves. These
lesions will continue to expand until they are bound
by leaf veins, giving them an angular appearance,
often surrounded by a yellow halo (Figure 1).
Angular leaf spot lesions may form a milky exudate on the underside of the lesion during humid
conditions (Figure 2). As the disease develops,
the lesions will turn brown and the centres will fall
out, leaving small, angular, shot-holes and tattered leaves. Water-soaked lesions on infected stems
and leaf petioles will exude a milky white bacteriainfested substance that will eventually dry to form
a white crust

Effect on Crop
Angular leaf spot is mobile within the phloem, so
an infection can spread systemically to the rest
of the plant. Circular, tan lesions on the fruit surface (0.04 - 0.12 inches, 0.1 - 0.3 cm) can appear and act as a site where secondary infection such
as bacterial soft rot can occur. These secondary
infections can further reduce marketability and
storability. Lesions on young fruit may also cause
a depression, resulting in deformed fruit. Systemic
angular leaf spot infections can also cause watersoaked lesions in the interior flesh of squash which
may not be recognizable until the squash is cut
open

Biology
Angular leaf spot can be vectored by insects such
as squash bug (see Perennia’s Squash Bug Fact
Sheet) and cucumber beetle, as well as through
infected seed and soil containing infected residue.
Seed-borne infections will usually show up shortly
after plant emergence as irregular water-soaked
lesions on the surface of the cotyledons. Bacteria
can remain in soil for two to three years, and can
show up at any time during the plant’s lifecycle.
Angular leaf spot infection can become more
virulent with extended periods of leaf wetness:
optimal temperatures for disease development are
between 24° and 27°C. Angular leaf spot lesions
will ooze droplets of liquid teeming with bacteria
from the undersides of the leaves in high humidity.
Dry weather for more than two weeks will usually stop the disease from developing. The bacteria enter the leaf through the stomata (breathing
pores), hydathodes (water-excreting pores on the
edge of the leaf), or small abrasions. The disease
can spread throughout the field by rain splash,
overhead irrigation, wind, insects, or during field
operations (tillage, picking, etc.) It is best to avoid
working in the field when the foliage is wet. 

Management
Poorly ventilated fields with cold, wet soils should
be avoided. The best method to avoid seedborne disease problems is to purchase treated
seed that has been certified pathogen-free. Seed
from infected fields should not be saved. There is
variation in resistance among cultivars and seed
catalogues should give further information. A good
crop rotation which excludes planting of any cucurbits in an infected field for two to three years or
more is advised. Infected crop residue should be
incorporated after harvest to aid in plant residue
decomposition. Avoiding over-fertilization with
nitrogen will also help limit disease development.
There are few bactericides on the market, and
both chemical seed treatment and copper-based
sprays have been shown to be largely ineffective
in managing this disease. 

---


