1. Bacterial Panicle Blight of Rice

Bacterial panicle blight is a major disease of rice
that tends to develop during hot, dry weather. Losses
include reduced yield and milling, and losses reported in
commercial rice fields vary from a trace to as high as 70
percent.
The seed-borne and soil-borne bacteria cause
seedling blights, but most of the damage in the United
States is associated with the developing grain. The
bacteria appear to survive between emergence and grain
formation as an epiphytic population on the rice leaves
and sheath, spreading upward as the plant grows. This
population infects the grain at flowering and causes grain
abortion or rotting during grain filling after pollination.
The disease is first detected as a light- to mediumbrown discoloration of the lower third to half of the
hulls . The stem below the infected grain
remains green. The grain discoloration and the green
stems are the key diagnostic characteristics ,
but those must be observed early in the season. Infected
grains can be unevenly distributed on the panicle. Over
time, diseased grains become infected with secondary
fungi and bacteria and become discolored gray to black
or pink – making diagnosis difficult .
Bacterial panicle blight tends to develop in circular
patterns in the field, with the most severely infected
panicles in the center remaining upright due to sterility
. Infected heads can be confused with
straighthead, but no parrot-beaked grains are present.
The disease occurs more when daytime temperatures
are in the high 90s or above and nighttime temperatures
remain in the 80s. High nitrogen levels also contribute to
disease development.
There is no prediction system for bacterial panicle
blight, and there are no chemical control measures
currently recommended in the United States to manage
it. Some rice varieties are more resistant than others. 

rice planted earlier in the spring tends to have less
damage from bacterial panicle blight because of cooler
temperatures at heading and grain filling. High nitrogen
rates also should be avoided. Since the bacteria are
seed-borne, rice crops planted with infested seed can
suffer severe losses. Ask an LSU AgCenter extension
agent in your parish for the latest information on
control of this disease.