Brown Spot (Helminthosporium oryzae)

Symptoms	 
Brown Spot is called as sesame leaf spot or Helminthosporiose or fungal blight
The fungus attacks the crop from seedling in nursery to milk stage in main field.
The disease appears first as minute brown dots, later becoming cylindrical or oval to circular.(resemble sesame seed)
Spots measures 0.5 to 2.0mm in breadth - coalesce to form large patches.
Then several spots coalesce and the leaf dries up.
Infection also occurs on panicle, neck with brown colour appearance
Seeds also infected (black or brown spots on glumes spots are covered by olivaceous velvety growth)
The seedlings die and affected nurseries can be often recognized from a distance by their brownish scorched appearance.
Dark brown or black spots also appear on glumes.
The infection of the seed causes failure of seed germination, seedling mortality and reduces the grain quality and weight.
50% yield reduction in severe cases.

Mode of spread and survival
The infected seeds are the most common source of primary infection.
The fungus also survives on collateral hosts. The fungus can survive in the seed for more than 4 years. Infected seeds, volunteer rice, infected rice debris, and several weeds are the major sources of inoculums in the field. Infected seeds give rise to infected seedlings. The fungus can spread from plant to plant and in the field by airborne spores.
The disease is common in nutrient-deficient soils and unflooded soil but rare on rice grown on fertile soils.
Abnormal soils, which are deficient in nutrient elements, or soils in a much-reduced condition in which toxic substances accumulate favor the development of the disease.

Identification of pathogen
Brown Spot: Helminthosporium oryzae—FUNGAL DISEASE
(Syn: Drechslera oryzae) (Sexual stage : Cochliobolus miyabeanus)
The fungi causing the disease occur in two states or stages. These are the asexual stage, which is called anamorph or imperfect stage and the sexual stage, which is called teleomorph or the perfect stage.
The somatic structures of the fungus consist of black velvety mycelial mats which are made up of prostrate hyphae and erect sporophores. The hyphae are abundant, branching, and anastomosing. They are dark brown or olivaceous and measure 8-15 µm or more in diameter. The sporophores arise as lateral branches from the hyphae. The conidia measure 35-170 x 11-17 µm. Typical conidia are slightly curved, widest at the middle and tapering toward the hemispherical apex, where their width approximates half the median width. Mature conidia are brownish with a moderately thin peripheral wall.

Favourable conditions
Temperature of 25-30°C
Relative humidity above 80 per cent.
Excess of nitrogen aggravates the disease incidence.
Leaves must be wet for 8-24 hours for infection to occur.

Management Strategies
Cultural methods
As disease is seed borne,Use disease free seeds.
Removal of alternate & collateral hosts.
The use of resistant varieties is the most economical means of control.
Growing Resistant varieties like ADT 44,PY 4,CORH 1,CO 44,CAUVERY,BHAVANI,TPS 4 and Dhanu.
Providing proper nutrition for optimum plant growth and prevention of water stress seem to be the most important factors in controlling brown spot.
The disease is rarely observed in normally fertile rice soils.
Soils known to be low in plant-available silicon should be amended with calcium silicate slag before planting and the field should be well irrigated to avoid water stress.

Preventive methods
Seed treatment with Pseudomonas fluorescens @ 10g/kg of seed followed by seedling dip @ of 2.5 kg or products/ha dissolved in 100 litres and dipping for 30 minutes.
seed soak / seed treatment with Captan or  Thiram at 2.0g /kg of seed
Seed treatment with Agrosan or Ceresan 2.5 g/kg seed to ward off seedling blight stage;
Since the fungus is seed transmitted, a hot water seed treatment (53-54°C) for 10-12 minutes may be effective before sowing. This treatment controls primary infection at the seedling stage. Presoaking the seed in cold water for 8 hours increases effectivity of the treatment.

Chemical methods
seed soak / seed treatment with Captan or  Thiram at 2.0g /kg of seed
Spray Mancozeb (2.0g/lit) or Edifenphos (1ml/lit) - 2 to 3 times at 10 - 15 day intervals.
Spray preferably during early hours or afternoon at flowering and post - flowering stages.
Seed treatment with Agrosan or Ceresan 2.5 g/kg seed to ward off seedling blight stage; Spraying copper fungicides to control secondary spread;
Grisepfulvin, nystatin, aureofungin, and similar antibiotics have been found effective in preventing primary seedling infection.
Seed treatment with captan, thiram, chitosan, carbendazim, or mancozeb has been found to reduce seedling infection. Seed treatment with tricyclazole followed by spraying of mancozeb + tricyclazole at tillering and late booting stages gave good control of the disease. Application of edifenphos, chitosan, iprodione, or carbendazim in the field is also advisable.

---

Dead Heart

Symptom of Damage
Presence of brown coloured egg mass near the leaf tip.
In vegetative stage larva enters the stem and feeds on the growing shoot and causes drying of the central shoot known as “dead heart”.
In grown up plant whole ear heads become dried and yield chaffy grains called as “white ear”.

Nature of Damage
In the vegetative phase, the central shoot dies off turning yellow in colour (dead heart). In the ear bearing stage, the ear head appears completely chaffy and white in colour (white ear head). Both come out easily when pulled up and show indication of feeding injuries at the base.

Identification of pest 
cientific Name - Scirpophaga incertulas
Egg
Eggs are creamy white, flattened, oval and laid in a mass which is covered with buff coloured hairs. They are laid mostly near the tip of the leaves. Egg period is 5-8 days.
Larva
Pale yellow with dark brown head having prothoracic shield. Larval period is 28 to 30 days.
Pupa
White silken cocoon. Pupation takes place inside the rice stem, straw or stubble. Pupal period is 8 to 10 days.
Adult
Female moth
Has bright yellowish brown with a black spot at the centre of the fore wings and a tuft of yellow hairs at the anal region.
Male moth
Smaller with pale yellow forewings without black spot.

Management Strategies
Cultural Methods
Field should be necessarily be scouted during the vulnerable crop growth stages for early detection of dead hearts and white ear.
Removal and proper disposal of stubbles will keep the borer population low in next crop.
Grow resistant varieties like Ratna, TKM 6, IR 20 , IR 40, IR 56, ADT 47, ADT 48, ASD 20, IR 36, ADT 44, PY 4, ADT 46, Madhu, Kanchana, Swarnapraba, karthika, Deepthi and Tellahamsa.
Clip the tip of the seedlings before transplanting to eliminate egg masses.
Collect and destroy the egg masses.
Avoid close planting and continuous water stagnation at early stages.
Pull out and destroy the affected tillers.
Harvest the crop up to the ground level and disturb the stubbles with plough immediately after the harvest to keep the borer population low in next crop.

Chemical Methods
ETL : 2 egg masses/m2 (or) 10% dead heart at vegetative stage (or) 2% White ear at Flowering stage.
When natural enemies of stem borers are present, application of chemical measures can be delayed or dispensed with.
The newly hatched borer larvae must be flit with 2 rounds of quinalphos or phosphomidon at 1000ml/ha at 7 days interval.
Spray any one of the following based on ETLs :
Quinalphos 25 EC 1000 ml/ha (or) Phosphamidon 40 SL 600 ml/ha (or) Profenophos 50 EC 1000 ml/ha.

Biological Methods
Release of egg parasitoid Trichogramma japonicum thrice at weekly interval starting 28 days after transplanting @ 5 cc (1 lakh egg parasitoids)/ha/release. followed by the release of Trichogramma japonicum at 35 and 42 DAT.
Apply Bacillus thuringiensis var kurstaki at 2.5 kg/ha to reduce the oviposition by the stem borer.
Release the egg cards in field during morning hours. Tie the egg cards under the leaf surface facing outside.
Avoid spraying of chemicals on three days before and upto to seven days after field release of egg cards.

Natural enemies and predators
Natural enemies
Tetrastichus schoenobii – Wasp
Telomomous rowani – Wasp
Stenobracon nicevillei – Braconidae
Cotesia flavipes – Braconidae
Agriocnema pygmae - Damselfly
Predators
Lycosa pseudoannulata – Spider predator
Metioche vittaticollis - Cricket

Trap Methods
Set up one light trap/5 ha to attract and kill the moths.
Set up bird perches to encourage bird predators.
Use sex pheromone trap for the control of rice stem borer.
Monitor through pheromone traps (@ 10 to 12/ha) for timely control measures. Change the lure at 15-20 days intervals.

---

Tungro Disease

Symptoms	 
Plants affected by tungro exhibit stunting and reduced tillering. Their leaves become yellow or orange-yellow, may also have rust-colored spots.
Discoloration begins from leaf tip and extends down to the blade or the lower leaf portion
Delayed flowering, - panicles small and not completely exerted
Most panicles sterile or partially filled grains
Tungro virus disease affects all growth stages of the rice plant specifically the vegetative stage.

Special detection technique
Collect leaf samples at 6 a.m.
The top 10 cm portion of the leaf is immersed in a solution containing 2 g of iodine and 6 g of potassium iodide in 100 ml of water for 15 minutes or 10 ml of tincture of iodine + 140 ml of water for one hour.Washed in water and when examined.
Tungro infected leaves develop dark blue streaks.

Identification of pathogen	
Tungro virus disease is transmitted by leafhoppers, wherein the most efficient vector is the green leafhopper, Nephotettix virescens (Distant). The disease complex is associated with rice tungro baciliform virus (RTBV) and rice tungro spherical virus (RTSV). RTBV cannot be transmitted by leafhoppers unless RTSV is present.
Insects could acquire the virus from any part of the infected plant. After acquiring the virus, the vector can immediately transmit to the plants.
RTBV particles are rod-shaped and 100-300 nm in length and 30-35 nm in width. It contains DNA of 8.3 kb. RTSV particles are isometric and 30 nm in diameter. It has a polyadenylated single-stranded RNA of about 12 kb.

Factors favouring disease development
Presence of the virus sources.
Presence of the vector.
Age and susceptibility of host plants.
Synchronization of the three above factors.
All growth stages of the rice plant specifically the vegetative stage

Management Strategies	 
Trap methods
Light traps are to be set up to attract and control the leaf hopper vectors as well as to monitor the population.
In the early morning, the population of leafhopper alighting near the light trap should be killed by spraying/dusting the insecticides.
This should be practiced every day.

Cultural methods
Planting of resistant varieties against tungro virus disease is the most economical means of managing the disease.
Use  Resistant varieties like IR 36,  IR 50 ,ADT 37,  Ponmani, Co 45, Co 48, Surekha, Vikramarya, Bharani, IR 36   and white ponni .
Among the cultural management practices, adjusting the date of planting is recommended.
Likewise, observing a fallow period of at least a month to eliminate hosts and viruses and vectors of the disease.
In epidemic areas follow rotation with pulses or oil seeds.
Apply neem cake @ 12.5 kg/20 cent nursery as basal dose.
plouging and harrowing the field to destroy stubbles right after harvest in order to eradicate other tungro hosts are also advisable.
Destruction of weed hosts on bunds.

Chemical methods
Leaf yellowing can be minimized by spraying 2 % urea mixed with Mancozeb at 2.5 gm/lit.
Instead of urea foliar fertilizer like multi-K (potassium nitrate) can be sprayed at 1 per cent which impart resistance also because of high potassium content.
Green leaf hoppers as vectors are to be controlled effectively in time by spraying.
Spray insecticides twice, 15 and 30 days after transplanting
Spray Two rounds of any one of the following insecticides
Fenthion 100 EC (40 ml/ha) may be sprayed 15 and 30 days after transplanting.
The vegetation on the bunds should also be sprayed with the insecticides. Maintain 2.5 cm of water in the nursery and broadcast anyone of the following in 20 cents Carbofuran 3 G 3.5 kg (or) Phorate 10 G 1.0 kg (or) Quinalphos 5 G 2.0 kg
In nursery when virus infection is low, apply Carbofuran granules @ 1 kg./ha to control vector population.
During pre-tillering to mid-tillering when one affected hill/m is observed apply Carbofuran granules @ 3.5kg/ha to control insect vector.

---

Rice Hispa

Symptom of Damage :
The mining of the grubs will be clearly seen on the leaves.
Scraping of the upper surface of the leaf blade leaving only the lower epidermis as white streaks parallel to the midrib.
Tunneling of larvae through leaf tissue causes irregular translucent white patches that are parallel to the leaf veins.
Damaged leaves wither off.
Rice field appears burnt when severely infested.

Nature of Damage :
The grub mines into the leaf blade and feed on the green tissue between the veins.
Adults also feed in the green tissue; they scrape green matter of the tender leaves.
Generally the plants are affected in the young stage.

Identification of pest :	
Scientific Name - Dicladispa armigera
Egg: Eggs are laid inside minute slits on the tender leaves generally toward the tip.
Grub: The grub is whitish yellow and flattened. It feed inside the leaf tissue by mining. It pupates inside.
Adult: The adult beetle is somewhat square shaped about 1/6 to 1/8” in length and width Dark blue or blackish in colour with spines all over the body.


Management Strategies:	
Avoid over fertilizing the field.
Close plant spacing results in greater leaf densities that can tolerate higher hispa numbers.
Leaf tip containing blotch mines should be destroyed.
Manual collection and killing of beetles – hand nets.
To prevent egg laying of the pests, the shoot tips can be cut.
Clipping and burying shoots in the mud can reduce grub populations by 75 - 92%.
Reduviid bug eats upon the adults.
Spraying of methyl parathion 0.05% or Quinalphos 0.05%.

---

Bacterial leaf blight
Causal organism: Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae

Symptoms
Bacterial blight syndrome exhibits three types of symptoms: leaf blight, kresek (the seedling blight or wilt phase) and the pale-yellow leaf.
The disease has been referred to as “bacterial leaf blight” to indicate that the “leaf blight” phase of the syndrome is the most distinct and commonly observed symptom.
Seedlings in the nursery show circular, yellow spots in the margin, that enlarge, coalesce leading to drying of foliage.
“Kresek” symptom is seen in seedlings, 1-2 weeks after transplanting.
The bacteria enter through the cut wounds in the leaf tips, become systemic and cause death of entire seedling.
In grown up plants water soaked, translucent lesions appear near the leaf margin.
The lesions enlarge both in length and width with a wavy margin and turn straw yellow within a few days, covering the entire leaf.
As the disease advances, the lesions cover the entire lamina which turns white or straw coloured.
Milky or opaque dew drops containing bacterial masses are formed on young lesions in the early morning.
They dry up on the surface leaving a white encrustation.
The affected grains have discoloured spots.
If the cut end of leaf is dipped in water, it becomes turbid because of bacterial ooze.

Pathogen Character:
The bacterium is aerobic, gram negative, non spore forming, rod with size ranging from 1-2 x 0.8-1.0􀀀m with monotrichous polar flagellum.
Bacterial colonies are circular, convex with entire margins, whitish yellow to straw yellow colored and opaque.

Favourable conditions / Epidemiology:
Clipping of tip of the seedling at the time of transplanting
Heavy rain, heavy dew, flooding, deep irrigation water
Severe wind and temperature of 25-30 0 C
Application of excessive nitrogen, especially late top dressing

Management 
Mode of spread and survival:
The pathogen survives in soil and in the infected stubbles and on collateral hosts Leersia spp., Plantago najor, Paspalum dictum, and Cyanodon dactylon.
The pathogen spreads through irrigation water and also through rain storms.

Cultural methods:
Burn the stubbles
Use optimum dose of fertilizers.
Avoid clipping of tip of seedling at the time of transplanting.
Avoid flooded conditions.
Remove weed hosts periodically.

Chemical Methods:
Seed treatment: Soaking of seeds in streptomycin sulphate 90% and tetracycline 10% SP @ 40 ppm for 12 hours or seedling root dipping @ 40 ppm for 30 minutes .
Foliar spray in the main field @ 100-150 ppm. Repeat the spray after 15 days, if required g/ac

---

Blast :Magnaporthe oryzae 
(Syn: P. grisea, Magnaporthe grisea)

Symptoms
The fungus attacks the crop at all stages of crop growth from seedling to late tillering and ear heading stage.
Symptoms appear on leaves, nodes, rachis, and glumes.
On the leaves, the lesions appear as small bluish green flecks. The lesions soon enlarge under moist weather to form the characteristic spindle shaped spots with grey centre and dark brown margin (Leaf blast). The spots coalesce as the disease progresses and large areas of the leaves dry up and wither. Spots also appear on sheath. Severely infected nursery and field appear as burnt.  
Black lesions appear on nodes girdling them. The affected nodes may break up and all the plant parts above the infected nodes may die (nodal blast).
Nodal infection causes the culm to break at the infected area
Inter nodal infection also occurs at the base of the plant which causes white panicles similar to that induced by yellow stem borer or water deficit
Lesions on the neck are grayish brown and causes the girdling of the neck and the panicle to fall over
If infection of the neck occurs before milky stage, no grain is formed, but if infection occurs later, grains of poor quality are formed
Lesions on the branches of the panicles and on the spikelet pedicels are brown to dark brown
The size and shape of the spots vary on different rice varieties.

Pathogen:
The mycelium is hyaline to olivaceous and septate.
Conidia are produced in clusters on long septate, olivaceous conidiophores.
Conidia are pyriform to ellipsoid, attached at the broader base by a hilum. Conidia are hyaline to pale olive green, usually 3 celled.
The perfect state of the fungus is M. grisea producing perithecia. The ascospores are hyaline, fusiform, 4 celled and slightly curved.
Survival and Mode of spread:

The fungus survives on collateral hosts viz., Panicum repens, Digitaria magrginata, Brachiaria mutica, Leersia hexandra and Echinochloa crusgalli.
Mycelium and conidia in the collateral hosts, straw and seeds are major sources of primary inoculum.
The secondary spread takes place through airborne conidia since spores of the fungus present throughout the year. Irrigation water may carry the conidia to different fields.

Favourable conditions / Epidemiology:
Intermittent drizzles
Cloudy weather
High relative humidity (93-99 per cent)
Low night temperature (between 15-20 C or less than 26 C
Availability of collateral hosts
Application of excess nitrogen

Management:
Grow resistant and moderately resistant varieties like CO47, CO 51, CO 52, CO 53, CO55, CO56, ASD 18 and IR64.
Remove and destory the weed hosts in the field bunds and channels.
Treat the seeds with Captan or Thiram or Carbendazim or Tricyclazole at 2 g/kg or Bacillus subtilis @ 10g/kg of seed.
Spray the nursery with Carbendazim 50 WP @ 25 g or Edifenphos 50 EC @ 25 ml for 20 cent nursery.
Foliar spray the main field with edifenphos 200 ml or carbendazim 100 g or tricyclazole 75 WP @ 200 g or iprobenphos (IBP) 200 ml /acre or azoxystrobin + difenoconazole 100 ml/acre when initial symptoms are noticed.

---

Bacterial Leaf Streak :Causal organism: Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzicola

Symptoms:
Fine translucent streaks are formed on the veins and the lesions enlarge lengthwise and infect larger veins and turn brown
On the surface of the lesions, bacterial ooze comes out and form form small yellow band-like exudates under humid conditions.
In severe cases the leaves dry up.

Pathogen Character:
The bacterium is aerobic, gram negative, non spore forming,
rod with size ranging from 1-2 x 0.8-1.0􀀀m with monotrichous polar flagellum..
Bacterial colonies are circular, convex with entire margins,
whitish yellow to straw yellow colored and opaque.

Favourable conditions/Epidemiology:
Clipping of tip of the seedling at the time of transplanting.
Heavy rain, heavy dew, flooding, deep irrigation water.
Severe wind and temperature of 25-30 °c
Application of excessive nitrogen, especially late top dressing

Mode of spread and survival: :
It is transmitted through seeds and infected stubbles to the next planting season.
The pathogen spreads through irrigation water and also through rain storms.

Management:
Cultural method :
Burn the stubbles.
Use optimum dose of fertilizers.
Avoid clipping of tip of seedling at the time of transplanting.
Avoid flooded conditions.
Remove weed hosts periodically.

Chemical Method :
Seed treatment: Soaking of seeds in streptomycin sulphate 90% and tetracycline 10% SP @ 40 ppm for 12 hours or seedling root dipping @ 40 ppm for 30 minutes.
Foliar spray in the main field @ 100-150 ppm. Repeat the spray after 15 days, if required.

---