Corn smut

Corn smut is a plant disease caused by the pathogenic fungus Mycosarcoma maydis, synonym Ustilago maydis. One of several cereal crop pathogens called smut, the fungus forms galls on all above-ground parts of corn species such as maize and teosinte. The infected corn is edible; in Mexico, it is considered a delicacy, called huitlacoche,[5] often eaten as a filling in quesadillas and other tortilla-based dishes, as well as in soups.[6]

Description
The fungus infects all parts of the host plant by invading the ovaries of its host. The infection causes the corn kernels to swell up into tumor-like galls, wherein the tissues, texture, and developmental pattern are mushroom-like. The galls grow to 4 to 5 inches in diameter. These galls are made up of hypertrophied cells of the infected plant, along with resulting fungal threads and blue-black spores.[9] These dark-colored spores give the cob a burned, scorched appearance.[citation needed]
Mycosarcoma maydis haploid sporidia
When grown in the lab on very simple media, M. maydis behaves like baker's yeast, forming single cells called sporidia. These cells multiply by budding off daughter cells. When two compatible sporidia meet on the surface of the plant, however, they switch to a different mode of growth. First, they produce one or another pheromone, and begin producing one or the other type of pheromone receptor; this depends on mating type a or b, as determined by alleles at two unlinked mating loci. If this signaling is successful, they then send out conjugation tubes to find each other,[7] after which they fuse and make a hypha to enter the corn plant. Hyphae growing in the plant are dikaryotic; they possess two haploid nuclei per hyphal compartment. In contrast to sporidia, the dikaryotic phase of M. maydis only occurs during successful infection of a corn plant, and cannot be maintained in the laboratory.
Mature tumors release spores that are dispersed by rain and wind. Under appropriate conditions, a metabasidium is formed in which meiosis occurs. Resulting haploid nuclei migrate into elongated single cells. These cells detach from the metabasidium to become the sporidia, thus completing the life cycle.

Ecology
Proliferation of the fungus inside the plant leads to disease symptoms such as chlorosis, anthocyanin formation, reduced growth, and the appearance of tumors harboring the developing teliospores. These teliospores help to overwinter the pathogen into the next season. They survive in the soil.[10][11]
Plants have evolved efficient defense systems against pathogenic microbes. A rapid plant defense reaction after pathogen attack is the oxidative burst, which involves the production of reactive oxygen species at the site of the attempted invasion. As a pathogen, M. maydis can respond by an oxidative stress response, regulated by gene YAP1. This response protects M. maydis from the host attack and is necessary for the pathogen's virulence.[12] Moreover, M. maydis has a well-established recombinational DNA repair system.[13] This repair system involves a homolog of Rad51 that has a very similar sequence and size to its mammalian counterparts. This system also involves a protein, Rec2, that is more distantly related to Rad51 and Brh2 proteins, and is a streamlined version of the mammalian Breast Cancer 2 (BRCA2) protein. When any of these proteins is inactivated, sensitivity of M. maydis to DNA damaging agents is increased. Also, mitotic recombination becomes deficient, mutation frequency increases, and meiosis fails to complete. These observations suggest that recombinational repair during mitosis and meiosis in M. maydis may assist the pathogen in surviving DNA damage arising from the host's oxidative defensive response to infection, as well as from other DNA damaging agents.

Habitat
Although not all the conditions that favor growth of M. maydis are known, there are certain environments where corn smut seems to thrive, depending on both abiotic and biotic factors. Hot and dry weather during pollination followed by a heavy rainy season appear to improve the pathogenicity of corn smut.[14] Furthermore, excess manure (and therefore nitrogen) in the soil also increases pathogenicity. Not only do these abiotic factors increase infectability, they also increase disease spread. High winds and heavy rain also increase disease spread as the spores of corn smut can be more easily transmitted. Other biotic factors largely have to do with the extent by which humans interact with the corn and corn smut. If corn debris is not cleared at the end of the season, the spores can overwinter in the corn fragments and live to infect another generation.[15] Finally, humans wounding the corn (with shears or other tools) present the opportunity for corn smut to easily enter the plant.

Management
Ear of corn infected with Mycosarcoma maydis
Losses from corn smut can vary greatly; however, annual yield losses rarely exceed 2% when resistant cultivars are planted. This disease can have a large economic impact on sweet corn, specifically when smut galls replace the kernels. There are many ways to control and manage corn smut; however, corn smut cannot be controlled by any common fungicide at this time, as M. maydis infects individual corn kernels instead of infecting the entire cob, like head smut.[16]
Some beneficial ways to contain corn smut include resistant corn plants, crop rotation, and avoiding mechanical injury to the plant. A mechanical injury can cause the corn to become easily accessible to M. maydis, enhancing infection. Additionally, clearing the planting area of debris can help control corn smut, as the teliospores from corn smut overwinter in debris. This is not the best practice, though, because corn smut can also overwinter in the soil; crop rotation is recommended. Lastly, as excess nitrogen in the soil augments infection rate, using fertilizer with low nitrogen levels or just limiting the amount of nitrogen in the soil proves to be another way to control corn smut

---

Common Corn Rust​

Common rust is a disease that occurs in temperate to subtropical areas, including the Midwest. Though it cannot overwinter in the Midwest, windborne spores reach northern areas of the US and Canada from southern areas where overwintering is possible.
Common rust is rarely an economic problem and can usually be managed by planting tolerant corn products, although a fungicide application may be warranted from time to time.

Disease cycle
Common rust occurs frequently in the Corn Belt. It is a fungal disease that is found in temperate to subtropical areas, including the Midwest. Though it cannot overwinter in the Midwest, windborne spores reach northern areas of the US and Canada from southern areas where overwintering is possible. Common rust development is favored by temperatures ranging from 60 to 77 °F (15 to 25 °C) and moist conditions caused by rain, dew, or 95% or greater relative humidity. Spores that land on leaf tissue can germinate in 3 to 6 hours if continuous moisture is present.
The disease is common on younger leaves that form a whorl, as water will pool in the whorl long enough for spores to germinate. Infections that do take place in a leaf whorl often result in pustules forming along bands. The early symptom of common rust is the appearance of chlorotic flecks on the upper and lower leaf surface that develop into powdery, oval or elongated, red pustules about 1/8 inch long (3 mm) as the spores break through the leaf surface. Pustules are scattered sparsely or clustered (Figures 1 and 2) and the spores they contain can be brushed off the leaf. The leaf tissue around the pustules may become chlorotic and may die, resulting in a lesion of dead tissue. The lesions sometimes form a band across the leaf, and entire leaves will die if severely infected. As the pustules age, the red spores turn black, making the pustules appear black, and continue to erupt through the leaf surface. Corn husks, leaf sheaths, and stalks may also become infected.

Impact
If infection occurs late in the season, the potential for economic yield loss is minor. However, the potential for economic yield loss increases if spores arrive early in the season, infection occurs when the plants are small, and the environment remains favorable for rust development. Corn products differ in their level of resistance to common rust; therefore, the disease development rate can be different for each product that is grown. Late-planted corn may have higher levels of infection because the growth of new leaves coincided with spore arrival from overwintering locations. Severely infected plants may show water stress during hot, dry weather, because the pustules allow water to escape from the plant.

Management
Planting corn products with higher levels of common rust tolerance is the best management option. General plant tolerance reduces the number and size of pustules and reduces overall severity of infection. Fungicides can effectively control common rust if initial applications are made while there are only a few pustules present per leaf. Though fungicides are commonly used in sweet corn and seed corn production, they are rarely warranted in field corn for common rust because the potential for economic damage is low. Scouting each corn field on a regular schedule can help determine if fungicide applications should be considered. If significant levels of common rust are present on the lower leaves prior to silking and the forecast is for cool and humid or wet conditions, a fungicide application may be beneficial.

---

Northern corn leaf blight

Northern corn leaf blight (NCLB) or Turcicum leaf blight (TLB) is a foliar disease of corn (maize) caused by Exserohilum turcicum, the anamorph of the ascomycete Setosphaeria turcica. With its characteristic cigar-shaped lesions, this disease can cause significant yield loss in susceptible corn hybrids.[1]

Hosts and symptoms
Lesions can eventually expand to a more oblong or “cigar” shape. They may also coalesce to form large areas of necrotic tissue.
There are several host-specific forms of E. turcicum. The most economically important host is corn, but other forms may infect sorghum, Johnson grass, or sudangrass.[2] The most common diagnostic symptom of the disease on corn is cigar-shaped or elliptical necrotic gray-green lesions on the leaves that range from one to seven inches long.[3] These lesions may first appear as narrow, tan streaks that run parallel to the leaf veins. Fully developed lesions typically have a sooty appearance during humid weather, as a result of spore (conidia) formation. As the disease progresses, the lesions grow together and create large areas of dead leaf tissue. The lesions found in Northern corn leaf blight are more acute if the leaves above the ear are infected during or soon after flowering of the plant.[4] In susceptible corn hybrids, lesions are also found on the husk of ears or leaf sheaths. In partially resistant hybrids, these lesions tend to be smaller due to reduced spore formation. In highly resistant hybrids, the only visible disease symptoms may be minute yellow spots.[5]
On severely infected plants, lesions can become so numerous that the leaves are eventually destroyed. Late in the season, plants may look like they have been killed by an early frost. Lesions on products containing resistance genes may appear as long, chlorotic, streaks, which can be mistaken for Stewart’s wilt or Goss's wilt.[6]

Disease cycle
In nature, E. turcicum lives and reproduces in an asexual phase with a relatively simple life cycle. In temperate regions, the fungus overwinters mycelia, conidia, and chlamydospores in the infected corn debris.[2] When conditions become favorable the following season, conidia are produced from the debris and dispersed by rain or wind to infect new, healthy corn plants.[5] Once on a leaf, conidia will germinate and directly infect the plant. The damage to the plant is relatively localized, although diseased corn plants are more susceptible to stalk rot than are healthy plants.[2] In conditions with high humidity, the fungus will produce new spores at the leaf surface, which are spread by rain or wind through the crop and create cycles of secondary infection.[5] One complete cycle on susceptible plants takes approximately 10 to 14 days, whereas it takes about 20 days on plants with resistance.[2] At the end of the season, E. turcicum goes into a state of dormancy in crop residue.

Environment
The ideal environment for NCLB occurs during relatively cool, wet seasons.[5] Periods of wetness that last more than six hours at temperatures between 18 and 27 °C (64 and 81 °F) are most conducive to disease development.[2] Infection is inhibited by high light intensity and warm temperatures. Leaving large amounts of infected residue exposed in the field and continuing to plant corn in those fields will promote disease progress by providing large amounts of inoculum early in the season.[5] Also, the number of conidia produced in an infected field increases significantly after rain due to the increase in moisture.[7]
Sporulation requires a 14-hour dew period between 20 and 25 °C (77 °F). When there is not a sufficiently long period of continuous humidity, the fungus will stop making spores and resume conidia production only when humidity level rises again. For this reason, sporulation often occurs during nighttime and is halted when humidity falls during the day.[7]
In the United States, NCLB is a problem during the spring in southern and central Florida and during the summer months in the Midwestern states.[8] On a global scale, NCLB is a problem in corn-growing areas in the mid-altitude tropics, which have the wet, cool environment that is favorable for disease development. These susceptible areas include parts of Africa, Latin America, China, and India.[1]

Management
Preventative management strategies can reduce economic losses from NCLB. Preventative management is especially important for fields at high risk for disease development. In-season disease management options, such as fungicides, are also available.
Management of NCLB can be achieved primarily by using hybrids with resistance, but because resistance may not be complete or may fail, it is advantageous to utilize an integrated approach with different cropping practices and fungicides. Scouting fields and monitoring local conditions is vital to control this disease.[5]
Major (vertical) resistance of corn hybrids comes from the race specific Ht1, Ht2, Ht3, and HtN genes, with the Ht1 gene being most prevalent. Plants with Ht1 Ht2, or Ht3 genes have smaller, chlorotic lesions and reduced sporulation.[2] The HtN gene delays symptoms until after the pollen shed. Individually, each Ht gene has limited effectiveness because there are races of E. turcicum that are virulent in the presence of one or the other. For example, widespread use of the Ht1 gene has reduced the prevalence of the Race 0 to which it has resistance against, but has increased Race 1. Breeders are now focusing on incorporating several resistance genes into corn hybrids. Incorporating both the Ht1 and Ht2 provide resistance against both Races 0 and 1. Thus far, this multigenic approach has proven to be effective. However resistant plants still show some symptoms, and the threat of new races showing up lends to the need for other management practices, especially in areas where the disease is present.[9]
Ways to change cropping practices to control the disease include reducing the amount of infected residue left in a field, managing weeds to improve airflow and reduce humidity, and encouraging residue decomposition with tillage. The tillage will assist in breaking down crop debris and reducing existing inoculum. In a system with normal tillage, a one-year rotation out of corn can be effective, but a two-year rotation may be required for a reduced-tillage system. If possible, planting in low areas that receive heavy dew and fog should be avoided.[5] A combination of crop rotation for one to two years followed by tillage is recommended to prevent NCLB disease development.[10]
The use of foliar fungicides for corn have also been shown to control NCLB.[5] Research suggests that using fungicides to keep the upper 75% of the leaf canopy disease-free for three quarters of the grain-filling period will eliminate yield loss [11] To ensure that newly emerging leaf tissue is protected from infection, before the plants are in tassel, fungicides should be applied on the same day that significant conidial dispersal is expected to occur. After tasseling and silking, timing becomes less important since plant expansion will have slowed down.[12] The disease pressure in the field and weather conditions should be monitored and evaluated beforehand to determine if fungicides are needed or not.[5]

Importance
NCLB can cause significant yield loss in corn. If severe disease is present two to three weeks after silking in field corn, grain yields may be reduced by 40 to 70 percent. In the U.S. Corn Belt and Ontario, NCLB has recently become a significant disease,[5] causing estimated yield losses of an alarming 74.5 million bushels of grain in 2012 and 132.3 million bushels of grain in 2013.[13]
In susceptible varieties of sweet corn, yields can be reduced by up to 20 percent. In fresh market sweet corn, not only is yield lost, but market value will decrease if the ear husks become infected. The lesions cause the ears to appear old and poor quality even if they are fresh.[7]
Researchers in Hokkaido, Japan have also discovered that NCLB reduces the quality of corn silage as animal feed. Their study showed that the digestibility of dry matter, organic matter, and gross energy was significantly lower in the inoculated silage compared to the control. Total digestible nutrients and digestible energy were reduced by 10.5 and 10.6 percent, respectively[14]

Pathogenesis
Spores of the fungus that causes this disease can be transported by wind long distances from infected fields. Spread within and between fields locally also relies on wind blown spores.
E. turcicum causes disease and reduces yield in corn primarily by creating the necrotic lesions and reducing available leaf area for photosynthesis.[5] Following conidia germination, the fungus forms an appressorium, which penetrates the corn leaf cell directly using an infection hypha. Once below the cuticle, the infection hypha produces infection pegs to penetrate the epidermal cell wall. After penetration through the cell wall, the fungus produces intracellular vesicle to obtain nutrients from the cell. After approximately 48 hours after infection, necrotic spots begin to form as the epidermal cells collapse.[15]
Fungal toxins also play an important role in disease development. Researchers have found that a small peptide called the E.t. toxin allows a non-pathogenic isolate of E. turcicum to infect corn when suspensions of conidia and the toxin were in contact with the leaves. This toxin has also been shown to inhibit root elongation in seedlings and in chlorophyll synthesis. Another toxin produced by E. turcicum, called monocerin, is a lipophilic toxin known to cause necrosis of leaf tissue.[16]

---