Bacterial blight of cassava

Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. manihotis is the pathogen that causes bacterial blight of cassava. Originally discovered in Brazil in 1912, the disease has followed the cultivation of cassava across the world.[1] Among diseases which afflict cassava worldwide, bacterial blight causes the largest losses in terms of yield.

Hosts and symptoms
Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. manihotis is capable of infecting most members of the plant genus Manihot.[1] Consisting of about 100 species, the most economically significant species is easily the widely cultivated woody shrub, Manihot esculenta, known colloquially as the cassava plant.[2] In cassava, symptoms vary in a manner that is unique to this pathogen. Symptoms include blight, wilting, dieback, and vascular necrosis. A more diagnostic symptom visible in cassava with X. axonopodis infection is angular necrotic spotting of the leaves, often with a chlorotic ring encircling the spots. These spots begin as distinguishable moist, brown lesions normally restricted to the bottom of the plant until they enlarge and coalesce, often killing the entire leaf. A further diagnostic symptom often embodies itself as pools of gum exudate along wounds and leaf cross veins. It begins as a sappy golden liquid and hardens to form an amber deposit.[1]

Disease cycle
Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. manihotis is a vascular and foliar pathogenic species of bacteria. It normally enters its host plants through stomatal openings or hydathodes. Wounds to stems have also been noted as a means of entry. Once inside its host, X. axonopodis enzymatically dissolves barriers to the plant's vascular system and so begins a systemic infection. Because of its enzymes inability to break down highly lignified cell walls, this pathogen prefers to feed on younger tissues and often follows xylem vessels into developing buds and seeds. Seeds which have been invaded by a high number of bacteria are sometimes deformed and necrotic, but assays have shown a high percentage of infected seeds are asymptomatic carriers. In moist conditions, Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. manihotis has been shown to survive asymptomatically for up to thirty months without new host tissue, but is a poor survivor in soil. It persists from one growing season to the next in infected seeds and infected clippings planted as clones in fields. Once one cassava plant is infected, the whole crop is put at risk of infection by rainsplash, contaminated cultivation tools, and foot traffic.[1][3][4] These are effective methods of transmission because they cause wounds to healthy cassava plants, and X. axonopodis uses these wounds as an entry point.[citation needed]

Environment
Hailing from Brazil, Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. manihotis excels in a humid subtropical to tropical climate. Plantations of Manihot esculenta often take place in soils characterized for being arid, lacking in nutrients, and prone to erosion especially when the cultivation occurs in sloped fields.[5] This crop is commonly found in the tropical and subtropical regions of Africa, Asia and Latin America, and X. axonopodis has followed it. It has been confirmed up and down Latin America into North America, Sub-Saharan Africa, Southeast Asia/India, and even Polynesia. These regions are prone to high precipitation rates, a climate variable that propagates Xam epidemics.[6] Constant rain events and windsplashes are the main form transmission of the secondary inoculum of the disease. Nevertheless, the high humidity and high air temperatures (77–90 °F) of tropical and subtropical regions make Cbb a conducive epidemic.[7] The favorable conditions described allow colonial growth and eventual swarm behavior to enter hydathodes, stomata, or wounds.[citation needed]

Pathogenesis
Similar to other phytobacteria, Xam requires the assembly of a type 3 secretion system (T3SS) to initiate infection.[8] After cell recognition by the T3SS, Xam releases type III effector proteins to modulate the cell's innate immunity. These effectors are denominated as transcription activator-like (TAL) effectors.[9] While varying among strains, TAL effectors maintain several domains conserved. These include an N-terminal type III secretion signal, a central domain, a transcription acidic activation domain (AAD), and a C-terminal nuclear localization signal (NLS).[10] N-terminal type III secretion signal allows the entry of the effector through the T3SS into the cell, and the NLS mobilizes the effector into the cell nucleus. The latter acts by emitting signals and recruiting host proteins for translocation.[11] After gaining nuclear entry, sequence-specific protein-DNA interactions are carried by the central region, which recognizes a specific DNA sequence to which it attaches. The specificity is acquired by a two-residues combination (12 and 13 mer) in every tandem repeat that composes the central region; a change in a residue will result in a change of specificity towards a promoter. Finally, AAD is known as the cause of final transcription modulation, essential for virulence or avirulence.[10][12] It has been recorded that Xam works with the activation of SWEET sugar transporters, promoting the efflux of glucose and sucrose to the apoplasm for bacterial benefit.[11

Management
Cultural approaches
Several disease management techniques have been developed to control Cbb incidence and dissemination. Cultural practices have been used to decrease the incidence of the pathogen or delay the effect of the disease in the field. Pruning or total extirpation of infected plant tissue, weed removal, use of certified seeds, bacterial analysis of stem cuttings and crop rotation are used the most to limit the disease presence in the field.[12] Transplantation of clones is the most common mode of propagation of this crop so the most important control of bacterial wilt of cassava is planting uninfected clones. In areas where bacterial wilt has not yet been established, it is important to raise a new crop from a meristem culture certifiably free of disease. In areas where the disease is already prevalent, great care should be taken to ensure clippings are taken from healthy plants and even then from the highly lignified portion at the base of cassava plants which appear healthy.[4]
Seeds are known to be able harbor the pathogen, but successful sanitation measures have been described. Infected seed immersed in water at 60 °C showed no sign of bacterial survival while the seed showed no reduction in germination potential.[3] Furthermore, the sanitation of tools and big machinery are crucial to avoid the infection of healthy plants through mechanical inoculation.[citation needed]
Intercropping and crop rotation have both been implemented in cassava cultivation and have been successful.[13] In the instance of crop rotation following an infected cassava crop, deep soil turnover is recommended and a period of six months should be observed before cassava is planted again; X. axonopodis is a poor soil survivor and does not sporulate, so this time frame should clear crop fields of inoculum. It is also important to clear the field of weeds as X. axonopodis is known to survive much longer epiphytically on weeds than it does in soil.[1]

Biological control
Colombian clones of cassava normally susceptible to bacterial blight showed a yield increase by a factor of 2.7 when applications of Pseudomonas fluorescens and P. putida were applied four times a month during the growing season. This approach shows promise but requires further investigation.[1][3]

Host resistance
The last commonly used method is the mixed cultures using resistant cultivars, keeping in mind that yield can be affected with certain cultivars.[14] There is considerable variance in cassava resistance to bacterial wilt, and this is a promising means of control. The resistance which has been identified in South American strains of cassava works by preventing colonization of the xylem. The genes which control this resistance are currently being mapped and implementation efficiency should see uptick in coming years.[15]

Importance
Cassava is a staple of the human diets in developing countries in the tropics. Global production in 2007 was 228 million tons, with 52% coming from Africa. It is estimated that cassava accounts for 37% of total calories consumed by humans in Africa.[16] It has been further estimated that it provides the sixth most calories of any crop worldwide.[13] These numbers would probably be even more impressive if bacterial blight were eradicated. Estimates for how much cassava crop Xanathomas axonopodis pv. manihotis destroys every year vary widely, but one infected transplant can end in 30% loss of yield in one growing cycle and up to 80% by the third cycle if no control measures are taken.[1] There have been a number of historical outbreaks of bacterial blight. Zaire lost 75% of its tuber yield and almost all of its protein-rich leaf yield every year of the early 1970s, while parts of Brazil lost 50% of tuber yield in 1974.[1]

---

Cassava mosaic viruses

Cassava mosaic virus(es) is a collective name used to refer to one or more of eleven plant pathogenic viruses in the genus Begomovirus. African cassava mosaic virus (ACMV), East African cassava mosaic virus (EACMV), and South African cassava mosaic virus (SACMV) are distinct circular single-stranded DNA viruses which are transmitted by whiteflies and primarily infect cassava plants; these have thus far only been reported from Africa. Related viruses (Indian cassava mosaic virus, ICMV) are found in India and neighbouring islands (Sri Lankan cassava mosaic virus, SLCMV), though cassava is cultivated in Latin America as well as Southeast Asia. Eleven species of cassava-infecting geminiviruses have been identified between Africa and India based on genomic sequencing and phylogenetic analysis.[1] The formal names of these species were changed to binomials (Begomovirus manihotis etc.) by ratification of proposal 2023.015P by the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses.
The viruses are members of the family Geminiviridae and the genus Begomovirus. The first report of cassava mosaic disease (CMD) was from East Africa in 1894.[2] Since then, epidemics have occurred throughout the African continent, resulting in great economic loss and devastating famine.[2] In 1971, a resistant line of cassava, the predominant host of the pathogen, was established and used by the International Institute of Tropical Agriculture in Nigeria. This resistance worked as an effective control for many years. However, in the late 20th century, a more virulent virus broke out in Uganda and quickly spread to East and Central Africa.[2] This highly virulent strain was later discovered to be a chimaera of two distinct Begomovirus species.[1]
CMD is primarily managed through phytosanitation practices as well as the use of conventional resistance breeding. Additionally, vector management and cross-protection help to minimize transmission and symptom development.[2] Though management practices are useful, the viruses’ high rate of recombination and co-infection capabilities have caused CMD to be one of the most detrimental diseases affecting food supply in Africa.[1]

Hosts and symptoms
The inflorescence of cassava (Manihot esculenta, Family Euphorbiaceae), a tropical tuber crop. Muruwere, Manica Province of Mozambique. The leaves show symptoms of cassava mosaic disease, caused by a virus.
Cassava originated in South America and was introduced to Africa in relatively recent times.[2] It is known to be a very drought-tolerant crop with the ability to yield even when planted in poor soils. When cassava was first grown in Africa, it was used for subsidiary purposes though it is now considered to be one of the most important food staple crops on the continent.[2] Its production is moving toward an industrialized system in which plant material is used for a variety of products including starch, flour, and animal feed.[3]
As cassava is vegetatively propagated, it is particularly vulnerable to viruses and thus Cassava geminiviruses lead to great economic loss each year.[1] When these infect a host plant, the plant’s defense system is triggered. Plants use gene silencing to suppress viral replication, though begomoviruses have evolved a counter-acting suppressor protein against this natural host defense.[1] Because different species of Begomovirus produce different variants of this suppressor protein, co-infection by multiple species typically leads to more severe disease symptoms.[4]
Initially following infection of a cassava geminivirus in cassava, systemic symptoms develop.[1] These symptoms include chlorotic mosaic of the leaves, leaf distortion, and stunted growth.[5] Leaf stalks have a characteristic S-shape.[6] Infection can be overcome by the plant especially when a rapid onset of symptoms occurs. A slow onset of disease development usually correlates with death of the plant.[1] Besides the conventional effects of host and pathogen characteristics, soil fertility was first shown to affect symptomology by Mollard 1987.[7]
Though the cassava-infecting geminiviruses causes most of their economic damage in cassava, they are able to infect other plants. The host range depends on the species of virus and most are able to be transmitted and to cause disease on plants of the genera Nicotiana and Datura.[8]

Causal agent and disease cycle
Cassava geminiviruses[10] are transmitted in a persistent manner by the whitefly Bemisia tabaci, by vegetative propagation using cuttings from infected plants, and occasionally by mechanical means.[11][12][10] Cassava produces its first leaves within 2–3 weeks of planting; these young leaves are then colonized by the viruliferous whiteflies.[13] This is the key infection period for CMD geminiviruses, as they cannot infect older plants.[14] As the genome of the viruses has two components, DNA A and B, that are encapsidated in separate geminate particles, it requires a double inoculation to cause infection.[10]
Generally, whitefly requires 3 hours feeding time to acquire the virus, a latent period of 8 hours, after which it needs 10 minutes to infect the young leaves.[14] There is variation in the literature on this score, however, with other sources citing a 4-hour acquisition time and 4-hour latent period.[12] Symptoms appear after a 3-5 week latent period.[13] Adult whiteflies can continue to infect healthy plants 48 hours after initial acquisition of the virus.[12] A single whitefly is sufficient to infect the host; however, successful transmission increases when multiple infected whiteflies feed on the plant.[12]
After entering the plant through the leaves, the virus remains in the leaf cells for 8 days.[12] As it is a single-stranded DNA virus, it needs to enter the nucleus of the leaf cells to replicate.[14] After this initial period, the virus enters the phloem and travels to the base of the stem and out into the branches.[12] Travel to the branches of the plant is much slower than travel through the stem, so cuttings of branches from infected stems may be free of disease.[12] Some literature has indicated that infection is limited to above-ground tissue, but it is not clear why this would be the case.[15]

Environment
The severity of cassava mosaic disease is impacted by environmental factors such as light intensity, wind, rainfall, plant density and temperature. Given that the viruses are transmitted by whitefly, the spread of the virus is going to depend largely on the vector. Temperature is the most important environmental factor controlling the size of the vector population.[14] In the literature, vector-preferred temperature estimates vary from 20 °C to 30 °C[13] to 27 °C to 32 °C[12] but generally high temperatures associated with high fecundity, rapid development, and greater longevity in whitefly.[13] Increased light intensity has been shown to increase activity of the whitefly vector.[12]
Whiteflies can fly at speeds up to 0.2 mph, and in high-wind conditions they can move much greater distances in a shorter time, thus increasing rate of virus spread.[14] This wind-dependent spread is reflected in the location of the whitefly in cassava fields, with populations greatest in upwind borders and lowest within the field.[14]
Virus incidence increases when cassava is growing vigorously.[13] Thus, plant density impacts the spread of the virus, with low-density fields encouraging faster disease propagation than high-density ones.[14] In dry areas, rainfall can be a limiting factor for cassava growth so higher rainfall will be associated with higher incidence of disease.[13] Populations of whitefly will increase with rainfall, but heavy rains may impede whitefly spread and thus decrease incidence of virus.[13]
Timing of planting can play an important role in the severity of disease, with cassava planted in March showing a 74% incidence rate of CMV, compared with 4% in August.[14] Seasonal distribution of the virus will vary with the climate. In tropical rain forest type climates, where it is wet and humid most of the year, rapid virus distribution occurred from November to June, and slow progress occurred from July to September.[13] This timing correlated with higher and lower temperatures. In a study of the disease in the Ivory Coast of Africa, maximum rate of disease spread was reached two months after planting.[12] Little to no infection occurs after three months, and variation in spread was due to change in temperature, radiation and population levels of whitefly.

Control strategies
Control strategies for cassava mosaic disease include sanitation and plant resistance. In this case, sanitation means using cuttings from healthy plants to start with a healthy plot and maintaining that healthy plot by identifying unhealthy plants and immediately removing them. This strategy does not protect them from being inoculated by whiteflies, but research shows that the virus is more aggressive in plants infected from contaminated cuttings than by insect vectors. There are also specific varieties that fare better against some viruses than others, so plant resistance is possible.[13] For example, hybrids that are a result of crossing cassava and other species, such as Manihot melanobasis and M. glaziovii, have been shown to have considerable resistance to CMV.[16]
Prevention methods of CMV spread include, avoiding planting alternative hosts of the virus, such as castor bean (Ricinus communis), adjacent to cassava, avoiding planting cassava if neighbouring fields have virus-infected cassava as these could be carried by Whiteflies. Prevention methods also include not planting alternative hosts of the virus vector Whitefly e.g. tomato.[6]
The CABI-led programme, Plantwise suggests intercropping with cereals and legumes, such as maize or cowpeas, to repel whiteflies and rotate cassava with non-host crops including sorghum.[6]
The Ministry of Agriculture Food Security and Cooperatives of Tanzania recommend uprooting diseased plants once every week by pulling them out by hand. Plants should be carried away from the field and exposed to the sunlight for drying and then burned to kill the viruses.[17]

Importance
Mostly grown as a food source in Africa, cassava is the third largest source of carbohydrates in the world.[13] In recent times, cassava production has turned from subsistence to commercial production.[1]
CMD was first described in 1894 and is now considered one of the most damaging crop viruses in the world.[13][1] Annual economic losses in East and Central Africa are estimated to be between US$1.9 billion and $2.7 billion.[1] Although cassava is also cultivated in Latin America and South East Asia, the geminiviruses infecting it are only found in Africa and the Indian sub-continent. This has been mainly attributed to the inability of B. tabaci to colonize cassava effectively in this part of the world.[1]
The Ministry of Agriculture Food Security and Cooperatives of Tanzania recommend uprooting diseased plants once every week by pulling them out by hand. Plants should be carried away from the field and exposed to the sunlight for drying and then burned to kill the viruses.

---